CK

SCIENCE
TEXTBOOK

FOR

CLASS VII

CK

ISBN 81-7450-654-3
First Edition
January 2007 Magha 1928
Reprinted
November 2007 Kartika 1929
January 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
October 2013 Asvina 1935

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.

PD 800T BS

© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016

Phone : 011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
K olkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

` 50.00

Publication Team

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCER T
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Amit Printing
Press, D-12 & 13, Industrial Area, Site-A,
Mathura (UP) 281 004.

Head, Publication
Division

: Ashok Srivastava

Chief Production
Officer

: Shiv Kumar

Chief Business
Manager

: Gautam Ganguly

Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editor

: Bijnan Sutar

Production Officer

: Arun Chitkara

Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Ashwani Tyagi

FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us
significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined
in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the Textbook Development Committee responsible for this
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Science and
Mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Prof. V.B. Bhatia for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel.
We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee,

CK

iv

appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, the NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.

New Delhi
20 November 2006

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

CK

CK

PREFACE
This book is the outcome of the efforts of the Textbook Development Committee appointed
by the NCERT. The committee met a few times to interact with one another to improve the
draft. Then there was a review meeting in which many experts and practicing school
teachers were invited to review the draft and suggest improvements.
By and large we have stuck to the format of the Class VI book. By now, famous
characters, Boojho and Paheli, have been used to make the text interactive. Attempt has
been made to recall children’s own experiences and build concepts around them. This is
designed to connect science that they study in the school with their every-day life.
Many activities have been suggested to clarify concepts. Some of these activities are so
simple that children can perform them on their own. The requirement of the apparatus
required for the activities is minimal. We performed all the activities ourselves to ensure
that there was no difficulty in performing them in the school situation. The activities should
also help children in developing skills such as presentation of data in tabular and
graphical forms, reasoning and drawing inference from the given data.
The language of the book has been kept as simple as possible. A large number of
photographs, illustrations, cartoons, etc. have been included to make the book attractive.
To help teachers evaluate children effectively, a large number of exercises have been given
at the end of each chapter. The teachers are encouraged to frame additional exercises to
test children’s understanding. Some challenging exercises have also been devised for those
children who would like to appear for the National Talent Search Examination conducted
by the NCERT.
We are conscious of the fact that there is a paucity of additional reading material for
children. We have tried to address this problem by providing non-evaluative boxes. These
boxes, in blue, contain additional information, anecdotes, stories, strange facts and other
such interesting materials.
We all know that children are mischievous and playful by nature. Therefore, in order to
prevent any untoward incident during the performance of the activities in the school or
outside, necessary cautions, in red, have been inserted at various places in the book.
To prepare children to assume their roles as responsible citizens of tomorrow, attempt
has been made to sensitise them to the issues concerning gender, religion, environment,
health and hygiene, water scarcity and energy conservation. We have sought to weave into
the text the value of cooperation and the importance of peer learning.
An important feature of the book is what we call ‘Extended Learning’. These are totally
non-evaluative, and purely voluntary activities and projects. Some of the projects in this
section have been designed to enhance children’s interaction with the experts, teachers,
even parents, and society at large. The children are required to collect information of
various kind and draw conclusions of their own.
My request to teachers and parents is to use the book in the spirit in which it has been
written. Encourage children to perform activities and learn by doing, rather than by rote.

CK

CK

vi

You can supplement, or even replace, the activities given here. If you feel that you have
better alternatives, especially with your local/regional flavour, please write to us so that
these activities could be used in the future editions of the book.
We have been able to include only a small subset of children’s experiences. You have a
better knowledge of their experiences because you are in touch with them. Use them to
illustrate the concepts being taught. Above all, please do not stifle children’s natural
curiosity. Encourage them to ask questions, even if sometimes you feel uncomfortable. If
you do not know the answer to a question on the spot, do not feel embarrassed. You can
promise them to find the answer and deal with it later. Make a genuine attempt to get the
answer from whatever resources are within your reach, such as senior school or college
teachers, experts, libraries, internet, etc. If, in spite of your efforts, you cannot get the
answer to some question, you could write to NCERT.
I must thank the NCERT for enabling us to talk to children through the medium of this
book. Every member of the NCERT has been courteous and helpful to us. If you find this
book useful and enjoy teaching/learning science through this book, the Editing Team and
I shall consider ourselves well-rewarded.
V.B. B HATIA
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee

CK

CK

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP F OR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune

CHIEF A DVISOR
V.B. Bhatia, Professor, Retd. (Physics), Delhi University, Delhi

MEMBERS
Bharati Sarkar, Reader, Retd. (Zoology), Maitreyi College, Delhi University, Delhi
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM), NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
D. Lahiry, Professor, Retd, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
G.P. Pande, Uttarakhand Seva Nidhi, Paryavaran Shiksha Sansthan, Jakhan Devi, Almora,
Uttaranchal
Harsh Kumari, Headmistress, CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of Education,
Delhi University, Delhi
J.S. Gill, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Kamal Deep Peter, TGT (Science), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bangalore
Kanhiya Lal, Principal, Retd., Directorate of Education, Delhi
Lalita S. Kumar, Reader (Chemistry), School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Mohd. Iftikhar Alam, TGT (Science), Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya (No.1), Jama Masjid, Delhi
P.S. Yadava, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal
R. Joshi, Lecturer (Selection Grade), DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Rachna Garg, Lecturer, Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ranjana Agrawal, Principal Scientist and Head, Division of Forecasting Techniques,
Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, IARI Campus, Pusa, New Delhi
R.S. Sindhu, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ruchi Verma, Lecturer, PPMED, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Sarita Kumar, Reader (Zoology), Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi
Sunila Masih, Teacher, Mitra GHS School, Suhagpur, P.O. Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh
V.K. Gupta, Reader (Chemistry), Hans Raj College, Delhi University, Delhi

MEMBER-COORDINATOR
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi

CK

CK

CK

CK

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations
involved in the development of Science textbook for Class VII. The Council
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing
and refining the manuscripts of this book: Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal,
Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar (Clock Tower), New Delhi; Mohini Bindra,
Principal, Ramjas School, Pusa Road, New Delhi; D.K. Bedi, Principal, Apeejay
Senior Secondary School, Pitampura, Road No. 42, Sainik Vihar, New Delhi;
Chand Vir Singh, Lecturer (Biology), GBSS School, Rajouri Garden (Main),
New Delhi; Renuka Madan, TGT (Physics), Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute,
Subroto Park, Delhi Cantt; Reena Jhani, TGT (Science), Darbari Lal DAV Model
School, Pitam Pura, New Delhi; Geeta Bajaj, TGT (Science), K. V. No. 3,
Delhi Cantt., New Delhi; Gagandeep Bajaj, Lecturer, Department of Education,
S.P.M. College, Delhi University, Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT,
New Delhi; A.K. Bakhshi, Professor, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi,
Delhi; N. Rathnasree, Director, Nehru Planetarium, Teen Murti Bhavan, New Delhi;
S.B. Singh, TGT (Science), J.N.V. Sonikpur, P.O. Trivediganj, Distt. Barabanki,
Uttar Pradesh; Madhur Mohan Ranga, Lecturer (Selection Scale), (Zoology),
Govt. College, Ajmer, Rajasthan; K.G. Ojha, Associate Professor, Department of
Chemistry, M.D.S. University, Ajmer, Rajasthan; Puneeta Sharma, TGT (Science),
L.D. Jain Girls Senior Secondary School, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi; Manohar Lal Patel,
Teacher, Govt. R.N.A. Exc. H.S.S. Pipariya, Distt. Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh;
Bharat Bhushan Gupta, PGT (Biology), Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, No.1, Shakurpur,
Delhi; Sushma Jairath, Reader, Department of Women Studies (DWS), NCERT,
New Delhi; Mina Yadav, Lecturer, DWS, NCERT, New Delhi; Swadesh Taneja,
Ex-Reader (Life Sciences), IGNOU, New Delhi and M.M. Kapur, Professor, Retd.
(Chemistry), Delhi University, Delhi.
The council is highly thankful to the India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi, for providing some illustrations for the Chapter 8: Winds, Storms and
Cyclones. The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable suggestions received
from the National Monitoring Committee in the development of the manuscript
of this textbook.
The dynamic leadership of Professor Hukum Singh, Head, DESM, for
providing guidance in the final editing of the manuscript and extending
infrastructure facilities is highly acknowledged. Special thanks are due to
Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor; and Bijnan Sutar, Assistant Editor, for going through
the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.

CK

CK

x

The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge,
Computer Station; Purnendu Kumar Barik, Musarrat Parveen and Satish Kumar
Mishra, Copy Editors; Neelam Walecha and Muhammad Aiyub, DTP Operators;
and Randhir Thakur, Proof Reader.
The contribution of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication
Department and Secretariat of NCERT is also acknowledged.

CK

CK

A NOTE FOR THE STUDENTS
The team of Paheli and Boojho will
be with you as you journey through
this textbook. They love to ask
questions. All kind of questions come
to their minds and they collect them
in their sacks. Sometimes, they may
share some of these questions with
you, as you read through the
chapters.
Paheli and Boojho are also on the
lookout for answers to many
questions — sometimes the questions
seem answered after they discuss
them with each other, sometimes
through discussions with other
classmates, teachers or their parents.
Answers to some questions do not seem available even after all these. They might
need to experiment on their own, read books in the library, send questions to
scientists. Just dig and dig and dig into all possibilities and see if the questions
can be answered. Perhaps, they would carry some of the unanswered questions
in their sacks to higher classes.
What will really thrill them would be your adding questions to their sacks or
answers to their questions. Sometimes, activities are suggested in the textbook,
results or findings of these by different groups of students would be of interest to
other students and teachers. You can complete the suggested activities and send
your results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in mind that activities
that involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done strictly under the care
of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and then enjoy doing all the
suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to help you much, if the
activities are not completed!
We would like to advise you that you must make observations yourself and
record whatever results you get. Keen
and true observations are necessary for
exploring any subject of study. For some
reason your results may turn out to be
To
different from those of your classmates.
Do not worry. Try to find out the reason
The Head
Department of Education in
for these results instead of disregarding
Science and Mathematics,
them. Do not ever copy results from your
NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
classmate.
New Delhi 110 016
You can send your feedback for
Paheli and Boojho at:

CK

CK

CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.

CK

CK

CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PREFACE

iii
v

Chapter 1
Nutrition in Plants

1

Chapter 2
Nutrition in Animals

11

Chapter 3
Fibre to Fabric

24

Chapter 4
Heat

35

Chapter 5
Acids, Bases and Salts

49

Chapter 6
Physical and Chemical Changes

58

Chapter 7
Weather, Climate and Adaptations of Animals to Climate

68

Chapter 8
Winds, Storms and Cyclones

80

Chapter 9
Soil

96

Chapter 10
Respiration in Organisms

108

Chapter 11
Transportation in Animals and Plants

121

Chapter 12
Reproduction in Plants

133

CK

CK

xiv

Chapter 13
Motion and Time

143

Chapter 14
Electric Current and its Effects

160

Chapter 15
Light

174

Chapter 16
Water: A Precious Resource

193

Chapter 17
Forests: Our Lifeline

206

Chapter 18
Wastewater Story

220

INDEX

231

CK

